=== Page 1 (pypdf) ===
Page 1 of 73
MALAWI GOVERNMENT
THE 2026-27 BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT
Delivered in the
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI
by
MINISTER OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC PLANNING AND
DECENTRALISATION
HONOURABLE JOSEPH MATHYOLA MWANAMVEKHA, M.P.
Friday, 27th February, 2026

=== Page 2 (pypdf) ===
1
MOTION
1. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move that the estimates on the Revenue,
Recurrent and Development Accounts for the 2026 -27 Budget be
referred to the Committee of the Whole House, to be considered vote
by vote and, thereafter, be approved and adopted.
INTRODUCTION
2. Mr. Speaker Sir, in compliance with the Public Finance Management Act
of 2022 Section 33 Sub-section 3, I am mandated as the Minister
responsible for Finance to present before this August House, a statement
of estimated Government revenue and expenditure.
3. I would like, therefore, Mr. Speaker Sir, to take this moment to express my
sincere gratitude to our State President, His Excellency Professor Arthur
Peter Mutharika, for his unwavering commitment to embark on a journey
of restoring the country’s macroeconomic sta bility and r ebuild the
economy. Within the first four months of the Democratic Progressive Party
(DPP) Administration , our President has demonstrated remarkable
decisiveness and visionary leadership in protecting the most vulnerable
Malawians, instill renewed confidence in our institutions and strengthen
fiscal discipline. These seemingly difficult steps have set Malawi on a
remarkable path towards economic recovery and prosperity.
4. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to thank His Excellency the State
President for trusting me to continue carrying out this noble duty of being
Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Decentralization, amongst

=== Page 3 (pypdf) ===
Page 2 of 73
many capable professionals in our country. It is with a sense of humility
that I stand before you to present the 2026-27 National Budget.
5. Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to highlight that the formulation of th is 2026 -27
Budget has also been informed by input from the general public solicited
during the National Pre-Budget Consultations, which were conducted
across all the thre e regions of the country. I am therefore, particularly
grateful to participants drawn from the Academia, Youth groups, Civil
Society Organizations (CSOs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs),
Faith-Based Organizations, the Private sector, Professional bodies,
Development Partn ers, Parliamentary Committees and other interest
groups. Their constructive engagement and valuable contributions
remain a cornerstone of sound and inclusive public financial
management.
6. With this input, Mr. Speaker Sir, it is with great honour and privilege that I
deliver the first budget since the DPP Administration returned to power in
October 2025, at a time when our economy was facing multiple
challenges. When the DPP Administration took over Government,
economic growth was stagnant, inflation was high, foreign exchange
reserves were below 2 weeks of import cover while fiscal deficit and
public debt were at unacceptable levels. This situation exerted a heavy
burden on households, busin esses and Government. It is for this reason
that this Government embarked on a number of interventions and
reforms to restore macroeconomic stability. Mr. Speaker Sir, I am pleased
to report that there are positive signals, such as stable supply of fuel,

=== Page 4 (pypdf) ===
Page 3 of 73
reduced inflation and interest rates , including reduction in prices of
selected commodities.
7. It is against this background Mr. Speaker Sir, that the 2026-27 Budget has
been framed and formulated under the theme “Driving Economic
Recovery and Sustainable Growth through Impactful Reforms and Fiscal
Consolidation.” This reflects our commitment to restore macroeconomic
stability, rebuild confidence, and lay the foundation for inclusive and
resilient growth. The 2026-27 Budget provides the fiscal context to this
theme and creates an opportunity for the new administration to
strategically articulate its policy direction and implement its
commitments. I am pleased to report that the Budget am presenting
before you Mr. Speaker Sir , is people -centered, pro -poor,
developmental and transformative.
8. In view of this theme , Mr. Speaker Sir, our immediate priority is
macroeconomic stabilization. Let me emphasize from the onset Mr.
Speaker Sir, that this Administration is geared to pursue prudent fiscal
policies aimed at reducing the budget deficit and consequently public
debt stock. As such, Government will strengthen domestic revenue
mobilization efforts including broadening the tax base, enhancing
compliance, and modernizing tax administration, while protecting low -
income households and productive sectors.
9. On the expenditure side, Government will continue to implement
austerity measures to eliminate waste, reduce non -essential spending,

=== Page 5 (pypdf) ===
Page 4 of 73
and improve efficiency in public service delivery. Resources will be
redirected toward s high economic impact sectors that drive
productivity, create jobs, promote and support growth.
10. In the same vein Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to unveil the National
Economic Recovery Plan (NERP), whose overarching objective is to
restore macroeconomic stability and promote inclusive growth through
investments in key productive sectors of Agriculture, Tourism, Mining and
Manufacturing. The Plan is aligned to the DPP Manifesto and the Malawi
2063 First 10-Year Implementation Plan (MIP 1).
11. Mr. Speaker Sir, let me now provide context of the economic
environment we are operating in at global, regional, and national levels.
Thereafter, I will present the performance of the 202 5-26 fiscal year and
progress made on the reforms and measures announced during the
2025-26 Mid-Year Budget. This will be followed by the macroeconomic
assumptions, k ey overarching policy objectives and reforms that will
anchor the revenue and expenditure estimates of the 2026 -27 Budget.
Lastly, I will present the public se ctor reforms that will support the
upcoming Budget.

=== Page 6 (pypdf) ===
Page 5 of 73
WORLD, REGIONAL AND NATIONAL ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
12. Mr. Speaker Sir , you will appreciate that our economy does not
operate in isolation but is also driven by global and regional
developments. Allow me therefore, to present the global, regional and
domestic economic developments to this August House.
World Economic Outlook
13. Mr. Speaker Sir, the January 2026 World Economic Outlook (WEO)
Report by the International Monetary Fund states that the global
economy is expected to remain steady amidst divergent forces.
Economic growth is expected to remain steady at 3.3 percent in 2025
and 2026, declining marginally to 3.2 percent in 2027. On the other
hand, global inflation is projected to continue its decline, with headline
inflation falling from 4.1 percent in 2025 to 3.8 percent in 2026 and 3.4
percent in 2027.
Regional Economic Outlook
14. Mr. Speaker Sir, economic growth in Sub-Saharan Africa is projected
to accelerate, rising from 4.4 percent in 2025 to 4.6 percent in 2026 and
2027. The growth is expected to be driven by on-going macroeconomic
stabilization and reform efforts in larger economies alongside
investments to suppo rt growth. Across the region, many countries are
also undertaking fiscal consolidation measures to recover from aid

=== Page 7 (pypdf) ===
Page 6 of 73
withdrawals, reductions in Official Development Assistance (ODA),
elevated public debt levels and constrained fiscal space.
Domestic Economic Developments
Economic Growth
15. Mr. Speaker Sir, the country’s economic outlook remains cautiously
positive, with growth projections maintained at the levels announced in
the November 2025 Mid -Year Budget Statement. Real GDP growth is
projected to increase from 2.7 percent in 2025 to 3.8 percent in 2026 and
further strengthen to 4.9 percent in 2027. This growth will be supported by
strategic investments in key productive sectors of A griculture, Tourism,
Mining, Manufacturing, and Small and Medium Enterprises. Special focus
will be put on increased production and value addition , export
diversification and import substitution.
Inflation
16. Mr. Speaker Sir, inflation has remained elevated since 2021 largely
due to food and foreign exchange supply constraints. The annual
inflation rate has declined from 32.3 percent in 2024 to 28. 5 percent in
2025, mainly with food inflation easing significantly. Moving forward,
inflation is projected to take a downward trajectory to 15 percent by the
end of the 2026 -27 financial year, signaling a gradual restoration of
macroeconomic stability.

=== Page 8 (pypdf) ===
Page 7 of 73
Money Supply
17. With regards to money supply, Mr. Speaker Sir, annual growth rate of
broad money remains a concern as it stood at 44.9 percent in December
2025. Private sector credit growth exceeded 40.0 percent in 2025, well
above the 25.0 percent that was recorded in 2024.
18. As highlighted above Mr. Speaker Sir, inflation in 2025 remained
elevated above the medium -term target, largely due to persistent
supply-side constraints. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank maintained a
tight monetary policy stance to tame inflation. These measures coupled
with the importation of maize from Zambia, contributed to lower inflation
outcomes in 2025 compared to 2024.
Foreign Exchange Development
19. Mr. Speaker Sir, the subdued economic growth in 2025 resulted in low
exports while imports increased sharply thereby aggravating external
sector imbalances. In 2025, the trade deficit was estimated at about
US$2.0 billion, reflecting import growth that continued to outpace export
earnings. Looking ahead, the trade deficit is expected to narrow as
productivity-enhancing initiatives to boost export capacity take shape
while simultaneously enhancing import substitution.
20. It is worth noting, Mr. Speaker Sir, the Malawi Kwacha
depreciated against most major trading partner currencies in 2025,

=== Page 9 (pymupdf) ===
Page 2 of 73
due to excess demand for foreign exchange and limited supply.
The ongoing initiatives to enhance foreign exchange generation
are expected to support the stability of the Kwacha and mitigate
further depreciation pressures.
Public Debt Management
21.
Mr. Speaker Sir, Malawi’s path towards managing public debt is
constrained by the current stock levels which stand at K23.9 trillion,
which is 90.9 percent of GDP as of December 2025. Of this amount,
65 percent is domestic debt, translating to K16 trillion. The high level
of debt is on account of domestic borrowing. The debt stock
remains worrisome and unsustainable, posing heightened risks to
macroeconomic stability. You may wish to appreciate that this
debt is exerting a lot of pressure on the country’s fiscal space.
2025-26 BUDGET PERFORMANCE
22.
Mr. Speaker Sir, allow me to briefly highlight the performance of
the 2025-26 Budget.

=== Page 10 (pypdf) ===
Page 3 of 73
Revenue Performance
23. Revenue and grants for the 2025-26 financial year are estimated
at K5.528 trillion to the end of the year, compared to the Mid -Year
revised projection of K5.461 trillion, translating to an
overperformance of 1.2 percent. Domestic revenue is estimated at
K4.545 trillion against the Mid -year revised figure of K4.478 trillion
representing a 1.5 percent overperformance. The strong rebound
in revenue performance is attributed to policy measures
introduced during the Mid-year budget review.
Tax and Non-Tax Revenue
24. To the end of the year, tax revenue is estimated at K4.392 trillion
compared to the Mid -Year revised estimate of K4.328 trillion while
non-tax revenue is estimated at K149.5 billion. However, the likely
outturn for tax revenue during the period is estimated at K4.392
trillion, reflecting a slight overperformance of 1.5 percent, while
non-tax revenue is estimated at K 153.6 billion, representing an
overperformance of 2.7 percent.
25. For the fourth quarter of the financial year, tax revenue is
projected at K1.214 trillion against a quarterly projection of K1.125
trillion, translating to a 7.9 percent overperformance . This
performance is attributed to the measures announced during the

=== Page 11 (pypdf) ===
Page 4 of 73
Mid-Year Budget Review, including adjustments to Value Added
Tax (VAT) and Pay As You Earn (PAYE).
Grants
26. Mr. Speaker Sir, total revised provision for grants from Foreign
Governments and International Organizations in the 2025 -26
financial year is maintained at the Mid-Year revised figure of K983.0
billion.
Total Expenditure
27. Total Mid -Year revised expenditure provision for the 2025 –26
financial year is estimated at K8.589 trillion and is expected to close
at K8.431 trillion representing an under -expenditure of 1.8 percent
on account of implementation of expenditure control measures
and under-performance in the project implementation introduced
during the Mid -Year Budget review. This expenditure comprises
K6.668 trillion in recurrent expenditure and K1.763 trillion in
development expenditure. Compensation of employees is
estimated to close at K1.691 trillion; public interest payments at
K2.328 trillion; use of goods and services at K1.450 trillion; grants to
Other Government Units at K545.2 billion; social benefits at K607.7
billion; and other expenses at K45.7 billion.

=== Page 12 (pypdf) ===
Page 5 of 73
Fiscal Deficit and Financing
28. The fiscal deficit for the 2025 -26 financial year is estimated at
K2.903 trillion, which is a slight drop from the revised midyear
projection of K3.128 trillion representing a 7.2 percent reduction.
This drop is as a result of the decrease in expenditure coupled with
an increase in revenue.
PROGRESS ON THE 2025-26 MID-YEAR BUDGET REVIEW REFORMS
29. Mr. Speaker Sir, I now wish to report that the reform measures
announced during the November 2025 Mid -Year Budget Review
Statement were not merely policy pronouncements but have been
translated into concrete actions. Allow me to highlight some of the
key achievements to date.
Food Situation
30. Mr. Speaker Sir, the 2025 National Food Balance Sheet revealed
that the country’s maize supply was estimated at 2.7 million metric

=== Page 13 (pypdf) ===
Page 6 of 73
tonnes against a national requirement of 3.72 million metric tonnes,
resulting in a deficit of 1.02 million metric tonnes.
31. Mr. Speaker Sir, as at February 2026, the Strategic Grain Reserve
stands at 81,576.75 metric tonnes, representing the nation’s maize
stocks held for food security and market stabilisation purposes. To
date, the Government has successfully procured 58,029 metric
tonnes, co mprising 42,200 metric tonnes imported from Zambia
and 15,829 metric tonnes sourced through local procurement.
32. Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to report that the maize market has
seen significant reduction in prices where a 50kg is now selling
between K38,000 and K 45,000, down from around K100,000,
thereby enhancing affordability and accessibility to all Malawians
even during the lean period and has averted hunger situation in
the country.
Farm Input Subsidy Programme (FISP)
33. Mr. Speaker Sir, the Government successfully increased the
number of beneficiaries under Farm Input Subsidy Programme
(FISP) from 528 thousand to 1.1 million households. Over 65 percent
of targeted beneficiaries under this year’s FISP have successfully
redeemed their farm inputs despite the delay in starting the
Programme following the September 2025 General Elections,

=== Page 14 (pypdf) ===
Page 7 of 73
compared to 45 percent same time last year, marking significant
progress.
Pension Arrears and Gratuities
34. Mr. Speaker Sir, the Government has made substantial progress
in reducing normal and death gratuities for retired and deceased
civil servants, respectively , following an additional K1 96 billion
approved in the 2025-26 Mid-Year Budget. As a result, it is expected
that by end -March 2026, about 11,000 retirees will have received
their terminal benefits representing approximately 92 percent from
the end year target of 12,000 retirees . This means Mr. Speaker Sir ,
the waiting period for pensions and gratuities w ill be reduced
substantially to 3 months from the previous average of over 36
months which is a significant improvement.
Free Public Primary and Secondary Education
35. Mr. Speaker Sir, this Administration has introduced free public
primary and secondary education effective 1 st January 2026. As a
result of this transformative reform , parents and guardians are not
paying general purpose, MANEB and identity card fees in public
primary schools. In addition, parents and guardians are not paying
development, tuition and MANEB fees in public secondary schools.
This reform ha s significantly increase d enrolment levels and is

=== Page 15 (pypdf) ===
Page 8 of 73
expected to reduce school drop -out rates thereby increasing
human capital development for the nation.
Resuscitation of the Automatic Pricing Mechanism (APM)
36. Mr. Speaker Sir , Government has resuscitated the use of
Automatic Pricing Mechanism to ensure cost -reflective fuel pump
price and reduce losses incurred by fuel importers and the Price
Stabilization Fund . As a result, there is increased availability and
accessibility of fuel in the country and that there are no fuel queues,
as has been the case in the past few years.
Revenue Measures
37. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government has commenced implementation
of the revenue measures announced in the 2025 -26 Mid -Year
Budget Statement. I am pleased to report that the VAT
adjustments, levy on transactions, and PAYE are in full effect.
38. In this regard, Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to clarify that withholding tax
on rental income is not a new tax , it has long existed under the
Fourteenth Schedule of the Taxation Act. As such, the Mid -Year
Budget announcement was intended to strengthen enforcement
by the Malawi Revenue Authority (MRA). I, therefore, call upon all
Malawians to support this initiative as part of our efforts to re store
our economy.

=== Page 16 (pypdf) ===
Page 9 of 73
Expenditure Control Measures
39. Mr. Speaker Sir, a number of expenditure control measures and
reforms were introduced during the 2025 -26 Mid -Year Budget
Review. This was done to reduce expenditure on travel related
budget lines and the fiscal deficit. I therefore would like to report
that to the end of the year, expenditure is projected to go down
by about K158 billion.
KEY ACHIEVEMENTS IN THE 2025-26 FISCAL YEAR
Agricultural, Tourism and Mining
40. Mr. Speaker Sir, in the agriculture sector, Government registered
significant progress in irrigation development under the Shire Valley
Transformation Project (STVP) , including expansion of irrigation
schemes covering 4,194 hectares . In addition, matching grants
were provided to farmer’s cooperatives under Agriculture
Commercialization ( AGCOM) and Malawi Watershed Services
Improvement Project (MWASIP).
41. In the Tourism sector, Mr. Speaker Sir, Government revised the
1968 Tourism Act and facilitated the establishment of the Malawi
Tourism Authority . This was complemented by continued

=== Page 17 (pypdf) ===
Page 10 of 73
implementation of the National Tourism Investment Masterplan. The
Plan comprises of 103 projects focusing on strategic infrastructure
development across the country in order to boost the sector.
42. Mr. Speaker Sir, in the Mining sector, key achievements include
recommissioning of Kayerekera Uranium Mine in Karonga under a
new Mining Development Agreement with Lotus Resources Limited.
Government is developing mining regulations to operationalize the
raw mineral export ban, and targeted research was undertaken on
agro-minerals, industrial minerals, and onshore oil and gas
exploration in partnership with Press Trust Malawi and Africa Fortesa
Limited.
43. Mr. Speaker Sir , in the transport sector, Government has
strengthened connectivity by significantly progressing works on the
M001 Road between Lilongwe and Chiweta with 155 kilometres
surfaced and opened to traffic. In addition, Government has also
constructed 30 kilomet res of the Lakeshore Road, and also
completed key city roads to improve traffic flow and safety.
Furthermore, Government has completed the rehabilitation of the
Nkaya-Kanengo Railway section which has enabled the
resumption of train services.
44. Mr. Speaker Sir, in the energy sector, Government has
significantly expanded electricity access across the country.

=== Page 18 (pypdf) ===
Page 11 of 73
Through the Malawi Rural Electrification Programme (MAREP) and
the Malawi Electricity Access Project (MEAP), over 186,000
households have been connected to power. In addition, a 60 -
kilowatt peak solar-powered mini-grid has been commissioned at
Mwansambe in Ntcheu District, further advancing inclusive and
sustainable energy access. Mr. Speaker Sir, negotiations for the
financing of Mpatamanga Hydro power project are at an
advanced stage.
45. Mr. Speaker Sir, to enhance local governance and ensure
people-centred development, Government has completed over
700 development projects under the World Bank -funded
Governance to Enable Service Delivery Project (GESD) in key
sectors such as health, education and agriculture over the past few
years. In addition, through Government financing, the Thyolo
District Council Office has been completed, while works on the
M’mbelwa and Mzuzu civic offices are at advanced stages.
Further, 24 Traditional Authorities’ houses have been completed,
with 31 more currently under construction.

=== Page 19 (pypdf) ===
Page 12 of 73
Health Sector
46. Mr. Speaker Sir, despite the reduction in donor funding for the
health sector, Government, recruited 5,992 health workers and
promoted 898 health workers. Out of this, 4,250 were recruited with
support from Global Fund and 1,742 workers with support from
Government. In ad dition, Mr. Speaker Sir, Government also
completed the following projects:
i. Construction of radiotherapy bunkers at the National Cancer
Centre;
ii. Infectious Disease Unit at Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital;
iii. Pediatric Eye Clinic at Mzuzu Central Hospital; and
iv. Construction of Khwisa and Chiponde Health Centres in
Balaka and Lilongwe, respectively.
Education Sector
47. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government has made notable progress in the
education sector, including the completion of 2,158 classrooms
and 321 sanitation blocks to improve learning conditions . Progress
has also been registered in a number of projects in public

=== Page 20 (pypdf) ===
Page 13 of 73
universities including t he construction of a 400 -student capacity
training facility for tourism and hospitality management at Mzuzu
University and University of Malawi Administration Complex.
THE 2026-27 FINANCIAL YEAR BUDGET
48. Mr. Speaker Sir , allow me now to present to this August House
the 2026-27 Budget estimates.
Macroeconomic Assumptions for the 2026-27 Budget
Mr. Speaker Sir , the following are the macroeconomic assumptions
that have been used in formulating the 2026 -27 proposed National
Budget:
i. Fiscalised GDP growth rate of 4.1 percent;
ii. End-period inflation estimated at 15 percent;
iii. Nominal GDP of K31.5 trillion; and
iv. Policy rate of 18 percent.

=== Page 21 (pypdf) ===
Page 14 of 73
Key Policy Objectives of the 2026-27 Budget
49. Mr. Speaker Sir , the 2026 -27 Budget estimates have been
formulated on the basis of the following key policy objectives:
i. To reduce the fiscal deficit from 11.9 percent to 9.0 percent of
GDP and consequently reduce Government borrowing and
debt. This will be achieved by implementing revenue
enhancement and expenditure control measures;
ii. To create fiscal space through debt restructuring;
iii. To prioritize allocation of resources to key productive sectors
of the economy such as Agriculture, Tourism, Mining ,
Manufacturing, and Small and Medium Enterprises;
iv. To enhance export promotion and import substitution
strategies so as to improve generation of foreign exchange
and boosting the country’s Balance of Payment (BoP)
position;
v. To undertake accelerated fiscal decentralisation by providing
significant resources to Local Councils through the Reformed
Constituency Development Fund (CDF); and

=== Page 22 (pypdf) ===
Page 15 of 73
vi. To strengthen fiscal discipline through performance -based
disbursement of resources for projects and all key
Government programs.
Total Revenue and Grants
50. Mr. Speaker Sir, the Total Revenue and Grants are estimated at
K8.126 trillion, which is 2 5.8 percent of GDP. This represents an
increase of 4 8.8 percent from the 2025 -26 revised figure of K5.46 1
trillion. Domestic Revenue is projected at K6.454 trillion, which is 20.5
percent of GDP. This represents an increase of 4 4.1 percent from
the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised figure of K4.4 78 trillion. This is on
account of revenue enhancement measures coupled with
automation of non -tax revenues and revision of user fees and
charges.
51. Mr. Speaker Sir, Tax Revenue is estimated at K6.203 trillion which
is 19.7 percent of GDP , representing an increase of 4 3.3 percent
from the 2025-26 Mid-Year revised figure of K4.328 trillion. This growth
is largely on account of revenue enhancement measures
introduced at Mid-Year. Specifically, growth is expected mainly in
Taxes on Income and Profits; Taxes on Goods and Services; and
Taxes on International Trade. Non -Tax Revenue is projected at

=== Page 23 (pypdf) ===
Page 16 of 73
K250.5 billion representing an increase of 67.6 percent from the Mid-
Year revised figure of K149.5 billion. Mr. Speaker Sir , this is on
account of review of user fees and charges; automation and
expected increase in dividends and surpluses.
52. Mr. Speaker Sir, Grants from International Organizations and
Foreign Governments are projected at K1. 672 trillion representing
an increase of 70.1 percent from the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised
figure of K98 3.0 billion. The increase is mainly from projected
disbursements from International Organizations.
Total Expenditure
53. Mr. Speaker Sir, the 2026 -27 total expenditure is estimated at
K10.978 trillion, which is 34.8 percent of GDP representing an
increase of 27.8 percent from the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised figure
of K8.589 trillion. This increase emanates from legacy commitments,
statutory expenditures and development expenditure. This
notwithstanding, the expected deficit to GDP ratio will improve to
9.0 percent from 11.9 percent in 2025-26 Budget.
54. Mr. Speaker Sir , t otal expenditure comprises K7.581 trillion
recurrent expenditure and K3.397 trillion development expenditure
representing 69.1 percent and 30.9 percent, respectively. Within
the recurrent expenditure, total statutory expenditure consisting of

=== Page 24 (pypdf) ===
Page 17 of 73
wages and salaries, public debt interest, pensions and gratuities
and other statutory expenses , is projected at K5. 092 trillion,
representing 78.9 percent of domestic revenue which is a drop from
97.5 percent in 2025-26 Financial Year.
KEY HIGHLIGHTS OF THE 2026-27 BUDGET
Wages and Salaries
55. Mr. Speaker Sir, Wages and Salaries are projected at K1.92 3
trillion from the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised figure of K1.63 1 trillion,
translating to an increase of K288 billion. This increase has taken into
account current personnel on the ground, salary adjustments and
prioritised recruitments in key sectors.
Pensions and Gratuities
56. Mr. Speaker Sir, Pensions and Gratuities have been allocated
K296.0 billion in the 2026 -27 Budget. This provision will ensure that
pensioneers are paid timely on a monthly basis and the backlog on
payments for gratuities continues to drastically reduce. Mr Speaker
Sir, this Government is targeting at reducing the waiting period for
receiving gratuities to at least 3 months.

=== Page 25 (pypdf) ===
Page 18 of 73
Public Debt Interest
57. Mr. Speaker Sir, Public Debt interest is projected at K2.793 trillion,
representing an increase of 22.9 percent from the 2025-26 Mid-Year
revised figure of K2.272 trillion, largely due to past committed debt.
With the ongoing external and domestic debt restructuring ,
Government expects further reduction in the debt interest
payment.
Use of Goods and Services
58. Mr. Speaker Sir, use of goods and services is projected at K1.503
trillion, representing a reduction of 0.3 percent from the 2025 -26
Mid-Year revised provision of K1.508 trillion. This is mainly on account
of one -off expenditure on tripartite elections; logistics for the
procurement of maize from Zambia; and reallocation of irrigation
development resources from Other Recurrent Transactions to the
Development Budget.
Grants to other General Government Units
59. Mr. Speaker Sir, the total allocation for grants to Other General
Government Units stands at K867.8 billion, representing an increase
of 5 9.9 percent from the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised provision of
K542.8 billion. This increase is mainly on account of the resumption
of road levy remittances to Road Fund Administration; transfer s to

=== Page 26 (pymupdf) ===
Page 19 of 73
Malawi Revenue Authority based on the upward adjustment of
revenue projection; and transfers to Subvented Organisations,
including Public Universities.
60.
Mr. Speaker Sir, one of the allocations within the Subvented
Organisations is K4 billion under Small and Medium Enterprise
Development Corporation for the expansion of local production of
uniforms for security institutions such as boots to reduce demand for
foreign exchange.
61.
Mr. Speaker Sir, it is worth noting other strategic allocations under
the Subvented Organisations as follows:
i.
K2 billion for Youth Innovation Fund under the National Youth
Council of Malawi;
ii.
K1.1 billion for Assembling Laptops and Tablets under the
Malawi University of Science and Technology; and
iii.
K3 billion for Agricultural Machinery Production under the
Malawi University of Business and Applied Sciences.

=== Page 27 (pypdf) ===
Page 20 of 73
2026-27 KEY SECTOR ALLOCATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Allocations to Agriculture, Tourism, Mining and Manufacturing (ATMM)
62. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government continues to prioritise key
productive sectors of Agriculture, Tourism, Mining and
Manufacturing because of their potential to stimulate
socioeconomic growth and development of the country. Mr.
Speaker Sir, the 2026 -27 budget has allocated a total of K1.3 34
trillion towards these sectors representing 12.2 percent of the total
budget.
Agriculture Sector
63. Mr. Speaker Sir, resources amounting to K931.1 billion have been
allocated to the sector in the 2026 -27 budget. Of this amount,
K111.45 billion is earmarked for Fertilizer Input Subsidy Program for
the 2026-27 growing season. In order to reduce the price of seed,
save foreign exchange and increase availability , K11.3 billion has
been allocated for Maize Seed to be produced and purchased
locally.
64. Mr. Speaker Sir, it is the intention of Government to ensure that
the Strategic Grain Reserves are replenished to their full capacity
to achieve national food self -sufficiency. In this regard, K60 billion
has been allocated in the 2026-27 budget for Maize Purchases. This

=== Page 28 (pypdf) ===
Page 21 of 73
allocation is over and above the 103,000 metric tonnes bought
from Zambia. In addition, resources amounting to K60 billion have
been allocated to ADMARC for purchase of commercial maize
and other crops. Furthermore, an a llocation of K26.7 billion has
been provided for Contract Farming activities.
65. Mr. Speaker Sir, to reduce the country’s overdependence on
rain fed agriculture, resources amounting to K40 billion have been
allocated for the National Irrigation Development Program. This is
complementary to other initiatives including the Shire Valley
Transformation Project and Programme for Rural Irrigation
Development with allocations of K241.1 billion and K3 billion,
respectively.
66. Mr. Speaker Sir, an allocation of K14 billion has been made to
various Mega Farms initiatives currently being undertaken by
Malawi Prison Services; Lilongwe University of Agriculture and
Natural Resources; Department of Fisheries; and Malawi Defence
Force. It is therefore pleasing to note that the Mega Farm initiative
has diversified to include Aquaculture Mega Farms that have been
allocated resources amounting to K3 billion. This is deliberate effort
by Government to boost fish production both for local
consumption and exports.

=== Page 29 (pypdf) ===
Page 22 of 73
67. Mr. Speaker Sir, other notable allocations under this sector
include
i. K18.1 billion for Mega Farms Coordinating Unit;
ii. K2.68 billion for N ational Food Reserve Agency (N FRA)
operations and rehabilitation of the Silos;
iii. K1 billion for Promotion of Mechanised Farm Operations
through Hiring Centres; and
iv. K2.5 billion for Livestock Infrastructure Development for
Sustainable Animal Health, Production and Marketing.
Tourism and Manufacturing Sector
68. Mr. Speaker Sir, K51.2 billion has been allocated to this sector in
the 2026-27 budget. Of this amount:
i. K7.4 billion for the Establishment of Special Economic Zones
under Malawi Investment and Trade Centre (MITC). Of this
amount, K6.4 billion is for completion of Chigumula site and K1
billion is earmarked to kick-start works for Magwero, Matindi
and Dunduzu Industrial Parks;

=== Page 30 (pymupdf) ===
Page 23 of 73
ii.
K5.4 billion has been allocated for Industrial Development;
establishment of commodity exchange market; and Small-
Scale Business Development;
iii.
K2.17 billion has been allocated for Wildlife Management and
Conservation;
iv.
K4.6 billion for International Tourism Promotion; Product
development in Kasungu National Park and development of
public beaches along the shores of Lake Malawi; and
v.
K500 million has been allocated to facilitate designs and other
preparatory works for Salima Integrated Tourism Resort and it
is Government’s plan to use resources under the CDF for the
construction of the Likoma Activity Center.
Energy and Mining Sector
69.
Mr. Speaker Sir, in order to harness the potential of the Mining
Industry, to create employment, earn foreign exchange and
develop infrastructure, a total of K352 billion has been allocated
towards this sector.
70.
Mr. Speaker Sir, as you are aware, Government established
Malawi Mining Company (MAMICO) whose mandate is to promote

=== Page 31 (pypdf) ===
Page 24 of 73
optimal development of the mining sector and maximise national
revenue generation. This institution has been allocated resources
amounting to K17 billion to kick-start their operations.
71. Mr. Speaker Sir, with regard to the regulation of the sector,
Government established the Mining and Minerals Regulatory
Authority. An allocation of K5. 6 billion has been provided to the
Authority to regulate the mining industry and create an enabling
environment for the sector to thrive. In addition, a total of K3.67
billion has also been allocated to Geological Services; and Mining
Services under the Ministry of Energy and Mining.
72. Mr. Speaker Sir, in light of the fact that mining activities require a
lot of energy, there are several interventions that the Government
is pursuing in the energy sector to promote mining in particular and
other economic activities in general. To this effect, a total of K219.8
billion has been allocated towards the energy sector in the 2026-27
budget.
Transport and ICT Infrastructure Sector
73. Mr. Speaker Sir, now let me turn to the Transport and ICT
infrastructure sector. This has been allocated K6 64.4 billion in the
2026-27 budget. These resources are for both operations and
development projects in the sector consisting of the Ministry of

=== Page 32 (pypdf) ===
Page 25 of 73
Transport and Public Works; Roads Fund Administration; Roads
Authority; and the Ministry of Information and Communication
Technology.
74. Mr Speaker Sir, with regards to the roads subsector, the policy
will continue to focus on completing the existing projects before
contracting new ones. I am also pleased to inform the August
House that with the resumption of remittances for the road levy to
the Roads Fund Administration, it is expected that a lot of
maintenance works on our roads will be done seamlessly.
75. Mr Speaker Sir, some of the notable projects under the sector
include:
a) Rehabilitation of M5 Road from Kaphatenga –Benga-
Dwangwa;
b) Continuation of Rehabilitation Works on sections of the M1
Road from KIA Turn-off - Mzimba Turn-off- Kacheche- Chiweta;
c) Rehabilitation of Nsipe-Liwonde-Zomba Road
d) Rehabilitation of Masasa-Golomoti-Monkeybay turn-off Road;
e) Rehabilitation of Mangochi -Monkeybay Cape Maclear
Road;

=== Page 33 (pypdf) ===
Page 26 of 73
In addition, Mr Speaker Sir , the following roads and bridges will be
upgraded and rehabilitated:
a) Lirangwe-Chipini-Namatunu-Machinga Road;
b) Ntcheu-Tsangano-Neno-Mwanza Road;
c) Chimwaza- Nambuma Road;
d) Rumphi -Nyika Turn-off-Chitipa;
e) Dyeratu to Chikwawa Boma Road;
f) Mwanga-Chitekesa-Zanjo Road;
g) Katuli-Idrusi Road;
h) Chiringa-Swang’oma Road;
i) Migowi-Phaloni-Swang’oma Road;
j) Lilongwe City West Bypass (Kaunda and Chendawaka);
k) Mangochi-Makanjira Road;
l) Chitipa-Ilomba Road;
m) Karonga-Songwe Road;
n) Dedza Boma Loop Road;

=== Page 34 (pypdf) ===
Page 27 of 73
o) Thuchira Bridge; and
p) Nsanama-Nayuchi Road.
76. Mr Speaker Sir, I wish to highlight that the above list is not
exhaustive. Honourable Members can therefore, refer to Budget
Document Number 6 for more details on the portfolio of roads
under construction.
Aviation and Rail
77. Mr. Speaker Sir, in the 2026-27 fiscal year, Government will:
i. Rehabilitate Bakili Muluzi Airport; Kamuzu International Airport
and carry out preparatory works and designs for the new Mzuzu
Airport;
ii. Expedite the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding for the
Nacala Rail Corridor;
iii. Carry out advance works on the Kanengo–Mchinji line; and
iv. Commence feasibility and design s for rail expansion from the
Central to the Northern Region. The Chinese Government has
expressed interest to finance the project.

=== Page 35 (pypdf) ===
Page 28 of 73
Marine and Water Transport
78. Mr. Speaker, Sir , in the 2026-27 Financial Year, this Government
will complete construction of Likoma Port and r ehabilitate and
upgrade Chipoka Port.
ALLOCATIONS TO SOCIAL SECTORS
79. Mr. Speaker Sir, investing in human capital development is
critical for socioeconomic growth and transformation of the
country. A healthy and skilled workforce is more productive and
efficient, thereby positively contribut ing to growth, development
and resilience of the economy. It is for this reason that a total
allocation of K2.7 trillion has been provided towards the Human
Capital Development Pillar of MIP-1.
Education and Skills Development
80. Mr. Speaker Sir, a total of K1.28 trillion has been allocated to the
education sector, representing 11.7 percent of the total budget. To
increase equitable access to education and provide a fair chance
to access knowledge to all the pupils regardless of their
socioeconomic background, Government introduced free Primary

=== Page 36 (pypdf) ===
Page 29 of 73
and Secondary education effective 1st January 2026, as alluded to
above.
81. Mr. Speaker Sir, the 2026-27 budget has therefore ring -fenced
resources amounting to K47.6 billion for this purpose. Of this amount,
K31.7 billion is for Free Secondary Education to cater for
development fees and K15.9 billion for Free Primary Education to
cater for general purpose fees.
82. Mr. Speaker Sir, a total of K11.3 billion has been allocated in the
budget to cater for free examinations and students’ identity cards.
83. Mr. Speaker Sir, an allocation of K11 billion has been provided
for Teaching and Learning Materials in both Primary and Secondary
Schools. This represents a 122 percent increase from the 2025 -26
revised provision of K4.96 billion. In addition, a total of K45.7 billion
has been allocated to the operations of Secondary Schools and
Teacher Training Colleges in the amounts of K31.4 billion and K14.3
billion, respectively.
84. Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to report to this August House that
Government has allocated resources amounting to K234.3 billion to
the country’s six (6) Public Universities. These resources are broken
down as follows: K171.97 billion for operations; K45.2 billion for
development projects; and K17.1 billion for repayment of Service

=== Page 37 (pypdf) ===
Page 30 of 73
Gratuity loans. It is Government’s intention that public universities
should not predominantly rely on Government subvention. To this
effect, after thorough consultations with various stakeholders,
students with capacity to pay will be required to pay cost-reflective
fees so that student loan subsidies should only be provided to those
who cannot afford. To achieve this, all universities’ management
are directed to categorise those students who can afford and
those who cannot.
85. Mr. Speaker Sir, the 2026-27 budget has also set aside resources
amounting to K42 billion for student loans and upkeep allowances
to cater for 40,000 students in public universities as announced in
the SONA by His Excellency the President, Professor Arthur Peter
Mutharika.
86. Mr. Speaker Sir, to provide requisite job skills and make our
graduates employable, ready and competent for absorption into
job market, there is an allocation of K4.5 billion for Graduate
Internship program. Additionally, resources amounting to K3 billion
have been allocat ed to prioritise completion of community
technical colleges.

=== Page 38 (pypdf) ===
Page 31 of 73
Health Sector
87. Mr. Speaker Sir, a total of K1.02 trillion has been allocated to the
health sector, representing 9.2 percent of the total budget. Of this
amount, K108.3 billion has been set aside for Procurement of
Medicines and Medical Supplies, representing a 13.1 percent
increase from the 2025 -26 revised provision of K95.8 billion. This
allocation is in the amounts of K58.3 billion and K50 billion for Central
and District Hospitals , respectively. This allocation is in addition to
the support from the Development Partners.
88. Mr. Speaker Sir, as you are aware, Central and District Hospitals
owe Central Medical Stores Trust (CMST), outstanding payments for
the medicines and medical supplies drawn down from the Trust in
the previous financial years. Government has therefore, allocated
K20 billion as a part payment to these arrears. This will ensure
consistent supply of medicines in our hospitals.
89. Mr. Speaker Sir, a total of K65.7 billion has been allocated for
operations of all the Central Hospitals and the Procurement and
Maintenance of Medical Equipment in these hospitals. This
represents an i ncrease of 34.4 percent from the 2025 -26 revised
provision of K48.9 billion.

=== Page 39 (pypdf) ===
Page 32 of 73
90. Mr. Speaker Sir, resources amounting to K25.3 billion have been
earmarked for the operations of District Hospitals. This represents a
10 percent increase from the 2025-26 revised amount of K23 billion.
91. Mr. Speaker Sir, I am pleased to report that the Malawi
Government has secured financing amounting to US$744 million
from the Government of the United States of America. These
resources are aiming at strengthening health systems in combating
TB, Malaria and HIV/AIDs and other infectious diseases.
92. Mr. Speaker Sir, in order to address the challenges in renal
ailments and treatment, K3 billion has been allocated for the
establishment of Dialysis Centres in a phased approach starting
with Mzuzu Central Hospital. Other notable allocations in the sector
include:
i. K11 billion for blood transfusion service of which K5 billion is for
Central Hospitals and K6 billion is for District Hospitals;
ii. K3 billion for Referral medical cases abroad;
iii. K1 billion for the Procurement of Ambulances; and
iv. K1 billion for ART Co-financing with Global Fund.
93. Mr. Speaker Sir, it is evidently clear that there are a lot of areas
that require financial support to achieve universal health

=== Page 40 (pypdf) ===
Page 33 of 73
coverage, through improving access and quality of health care
services to all Malawians.
94. Mr. Speaker Sir, it is therefore, important for Government to
come up with innovative means of mobilising and pooling
resources for this sector to strengthen its service delivery. In this
regard, Government has introduced paying wards in all the Central
and District Hospitals so that people that can afford to pay for
healthcare services should do so, thereby subsidis izing those that
are unable to pay.
95. Mr. Speaker, Sir, regarding healthcare infrastructure,
Government will commence construction of Blantyre and
Chikwawa District Hospitals in the 2026 -27 Financial Year with
financing from both Government and Development Partners.
Social Protection
96. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government will continue to mitigate against
the negative impact of economic downturn and price escalations
on the poor and vulnerable groups. In this regard, various
interventions have been put in place to safeguard the
underprivileged sections of the society. Some of these interventions
include:

=== Page 41 (pypdf) ===
Page 34 of 73
i. Distribution of relief maize to household s that have been
severely affected by drought and hunger consistent with the
recent Malawi Vulnerability Assessment Committee Report;
ii. Allocation of K7 billion for the Social Cash Transfer Program,
representing an increase of 58.6 percent from the 2025 -26
revised provision of K4.4 billion. This has been done with the
intention to progressively increase coverage to 4 additional
districts namely: Mwanza, Neno, Ntchisi and Nkhotakota, with
collaboration from our Development Partners; and
iii. Allocation of K2.0 billion for the Disability Trust Fund. Of this
amount K250 million has been earmarked for grants to persons
with disabilities. In addition, K1.0 billion has been allocated to
the National Children’s Commission to promote the rights and
welfare of children.
Development Expenditure
97. Mr. Speaker Sir, in the 2026 -27 FY, total development
expenditure is projected at K3.397 trillion, representing an increase
of 7 6.4 percent from the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised provision of
K1.926 trillion. Out of this amount, K2.0 34 trillion is for foreign
financed projects and K1. 363 trillion is for domestically financed
projects.

=== Page 42 (pypdf) ===
Page 35 of 73
98. Mr. Speaker Sir, the projected total development expenditure of
K3.397 trillion, represents 30.9 percent of the total estimated
expenditure. This is a significant improvement compared to 2025 -
26 Budget, which had only allocated 20.9 percent.
99. Mr. Speaker Sir, I invite Honourable Members to refer to budget
document number 6 and all the other budget documents that
provide more details on the projects being implemented by
Central Government throughout the country.
Reformed Constituency Development Fund
100. Mr. Speaker Sir, as this Honourable House is aware, one of the
key commitments of this Government is to provide people centred
and community driven development , through enhanced
governance systems and performance -based financing. In
fulfilment of this commitment, Mr. Speaker Sir, I am pleased to
inform the nation that starting from 1 st April 2026, Government will
introduce the Reformed Constituency Development Fund, with a
total allocation of K1.145 trillion, translating to K5 billion per
constituency.
101. Mr. Speaker Sir, in view of this development, various projects that
were initially implemented by Central M inistries, Departments and
Agencies (MDAs) have been devolved to the Local Councils.

=== Page 43 (pypdf) ===
Page 36 of 73
Consequently, the 2026-27 Budget for Central MDAs, will not reflect
allocations to these projects. However, it must be noted Mr.
Speaker Sir, that some of the projects will remain with Central
Government solely for the purpose of clearing outstanding
certificates that have already been submitted to my Ministry.
102. Mr. Speaker Sir, I am pleased to inform the August House that the
CDF Guidelines will be finalised after consultations with key
stakeholders.
Local Currency Bond Financed Projects
103. Mr. Speaker Sir, to expedite the completion of targeted projects,
a special financing instrument called “Development Bond” will be
issued to allow some projects to draw resources for their on -going
works. A total of K78 billion is earmarked for this purpose targeting
the following projects:
i. Construction of Mombera University;
ii. Construction of 10,000 Housing Units for Security Institutions;
iii. Construction of Kholongo Multi-Purpose Dam for Mponela
Town;
iv. Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Limbe -Bangula-
Marka Railway Section;

=== Page 44 (pypdf) ===
Page 37 of 73
v. Rehabilitation of Kaphatenga-Dwangwa Road;
vi. Upgrading of Chitipa-Ilomba Road; and
vii. Construction of Ntchisi-Malomo Road
Fiscal Deficit
104. Mr. Speaker Sir , the 2026 -27 fiscal deficit is projected at K2.85 2
trillion, which is 9.0 percent of GDP. This is 8.8 percent improvement
when compared to the 2025 -26 Mid-Year revised fiscal deficit of
11.9 percent confirming the new Administration’s commitment to
fiscal consolidation and macroeconomic stability.

=== Page 45 (pypdf) ===
Page 38 of 73
PUBLIC SECTOR REFORMS AND MEASURES
Public Finance Management
105. Mr. Speaker Sir, in order to enhance efficiency and effectiveness
on public procurement and disposal operations in all procuring and
disposing entities (PDEs) the use of Malawi National Electronic
Procurement System (MANePS) will be mandatory effective 1st April,
2026. As such, all Government MDAs are required to procure goods
and services through this system.
106. Mr. Speaker Sir, to evaluate the extent of Public Finance
Management systems, Government will undertake Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment (PEFA). The
results of the assessment will inform the mid -term review of the
Public Finance Management Reform Strategy.
107. Mr. Speaker Sir , in order to strengthen transparency and
accountability in the use of public funds, Government will establish
Audit Committees i n all M inistries, Departments and Agencies in
accordance with the Public Finance Management Act (2022). The
audit committees will oversee and provide advice on systems and
practices for governance and risk management; compliance with
laws, policies and standards of ethical conduct; fraud prevention
and ensure recurring audit issues are addressed.

=== Page 46 (pypdf) ===
Page 39 of 73
Administrative Budget Measures
108. Mr. Speaker Sir , in order to achieve the 2026-27 Budget
objectives, all the austerity measures announced by Government
in November 2025 will continue to be in force as follows:
administrative budget measures:
a) Procurement of motor vehicles: Government has put a
moratorium on procurement of new vehicles and high
value assets until further notice.
b) Recruitments: Recruitments have been suspended,
including non -established posts until further notice.
Recruitment in essential and critical Government services
will be considered.
c) Promotions: Promotion of officers from Grade F and below
will require prior authority from Treasury and Department of
Human Resource Management and Development
(DHRMD) to verify availability of funds. Promotions made
without this approval will be rendered invalid.
d) Payroll: All Controlling Officers are being reminded to
personally verify and approve all payroll submissions made
to the Department of Human Resource Management and
Development (DHRMD).

=== Page 47 (pypdf) ===
Page 40 of 73
e) Meetings: Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs)
are encouraged to hold physical meetings within their
office premises and conduct virtual meetings,
conferences, workshops, board meetings, interviews,
shortlisting exercises, procurement negotiations and any
other activities to save resources on travel.
f) External Travel : Government will limit external travel and
size of delegations t o save foreign exchange . All
Controlling Officers and Senior Management of State -
Owned Enterprises (SOEs) shall seek approval for any
external travel from the Chief Secretary . In case of fully
funded trips by Development Partners, there shall be no
top-up allowances towards such travel.
g) Procurement: According to the Public Finance
Management Act (2022), it is illegal to commit Government
where there are no resources. Accordingly, all MDAs will be
required to procure goods and services based on the
quarterly allotments provided by Treasury. Suppliers will be
required to supply their goods or services only when they
have received an IFMIS -generated Local Purchase Order
(LPOs). All goods and services supplied without a system -
generated LPO will not be paid by Government.

=== Page 48 (pypdf) ===
Page 41 of 73
h) Extra-budgetary requests: Extra-budgetary requests are
not allowed and shall not be entertained by Treasury,
except on special cases. MDAs expenditures will be
restricted to the approved budget provision.
i) Fuel entitlement: Fuel entitlements for public officers
including Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Senior
Government Officials shall be reduced by 30 percent.
j) Mineral Contracts: Government will review all mining
licences and contracts. Any mining licences which have
been idle for more than five (5) years shall be revoked.
k) Staff in Embassies : Government will reduce number of
embassies and staff. Each embassy shall have not more
than five officials including the Ambassador/High
Commissioner.
109. Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to reiterate that no MDA should enter into
a contract seeking Engineering, Procurement, Construction and
Financial Model services without prior approval from the Ministry of
Finance, Economic Planning and Decentralisation. Further to this, I
wish to direct that:
a. No Controlling Officer, Government Officer or Chief
Executive Officer should sign a contract binding the

=== Page 49 (pypdf) ===
Page 42 of 73
Government without prior scrutiny and written approval
from Treasury, Ministry of Justice, Public Procurement
and Disposal of Public Assets Authority, and Government
Contracting Unit;
b. No Controlling Officer, Government Officer or Chief
Executive Officer should commit Government through
Assignment of Proceeds Agreements with Banks or any
other financial institution on behalf of
suppliers/contractors/ service providers;
c. All projects and contracts must be executed within the
agreed timeframe. No cost and time extensions shall be
allowed, except on special cases where such extensions
shall be at no cost to avoid budget overruns;
d. Controlling Officers and Chief Executive Officers must
ensure that relevant financial rules and regulations are
strictly adhered to during project initiation, execution
and closure to avoid declaration of mis -procurement
and ineligible expenditures; and
e. Government Guarantees and Consents shall only be
issued on a special case and where there is no recourse
to Government.

=== Page 50 (pypdf) ===
Page 43 of 73
110. Mr. Speaker Sir , Government has put in place additional
measures in order to further contain the expenditures as follows:
i. Government will review the operations of all the Subvented
Organizations and State -Owned Enterprises with a view to
streamline their activities , merge or close them, where
deemed necessary; and
ii. Security institutions will be supported to produce various crops
such as maize and legumes to supplement ration provision
and thereby reducing on their expenses on food.
111. Mr. Speaker Sir, to minimise demand on foreign exchange, the
following measures will be pursued:
i. Subscriptions to international organisations that various MDAs
are affiliated to, is being reviewed to ensure that only strategic
organisations are prioritised, and
ii. Encourage local production of uniforms for security institutions in
order to boost local manufacturing.
Monetary Policy
112. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government will work with all financial institutions
to bring down interest rates and reduce the spread between

=== Page 51 (pypdf) ===
Page 44 of 73
lending and deposit rates to allow our private sector to access
credit at affordable rates.
Foreign Exchange Management
113. Mr. Speaker Sir, regarding foreign exchange management,
Government has put in place strict measures to safeguard the
foreign exchange and ensure that it is channeled to the formal
system. To curb illegal externalization of forex, the Bank in
collaboration with law enforcement agencies including Malawi
Revenue Authority (MRA), Financial Intelligence Authority (FIA) and
Fiscal Police have stepped up investigations on suspicious
transactions and prosecution of such cases.
114. Mr. Speaker Sir, the Bank will regulate Money Transfer Agencies
and Operators to mitigate forex leakage and prevent exchange
rate exploitation. In addition, the licensing regime for authorized
dealers has been enhanced to a robust, two -year renewable
licenses issued on the basis of strict compliance requirements.
OTHER REFORMS
Structured Markets
Mr. Speaker Sir, Government in the 2026-27 Budget will establish a
National Commodity Exchange Market to provide structured and

=== Page 52 (pypdf) ===
Page 45 of 73
transparent markets for our key commodities. Th e Commodity
Exchange will not only serve the agricultur e sector but will also
extend to mining and other strategic commodities.
Repatriation of Export Proceeds
115. Mr. Speaker Sir, foreign exchange regulations are currently
under review to improve market functioning and supply. Strategic
imports are prioritised to sustain production and essential services.
The RBM is closely monitoring repatriation of export proceeds
through enforcement of CD1 forms. Further, the mandatory
repatriation period for export proceeds has been reduced from 120
days to 90 days to enhance market liquidity.
REVENUE POLICY AND ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES
116. Mr. Speaker Sir, the revenue policy and administrative measures
I now present are designed to strengthen domestic resource
mobilisation, protect local industry, promote import substitution,
and enhance tax administration efficiency.
117. Mr. Speaker Sir, My Ministry held extensive engagements with the
private sector representatives, professional bodies, civil society
organisations, and development partners. Written submissions were

=== Page 53 (pypdf) ===
Page 46 of 73
also received from companies and private citizens proposing
reforms to improve efficiency and fairness of our tax system. The
contributions provided have enriched this Budget. I, therefore,
would like to thank all those that contributed their ideas toward the
development of these revenue measures.
TAX POLICY MEASURES FOR THE 2026-27 BUDGET
118. Mr. Speaker Sir, the Customs and Excise Tax measures that I am
about to announce today will become effective mid-night tonight,
while the Taxation and Value Added Tax measures wilI take effect
on 1 st April 2026, subject to the approval of the Bills by this
Honourable House, and subsequent assent by His Excellency the
State President.
CUSTOMS AND EXCISE TAX MEASURES
119. Mr. Speaker Sir, recognising the important role that Community
Technical Colleges play in equipping the youth in our rural areas
with vocational and technical skills, Government will remove import
duties and taxes on essential teaching and learning equipment

=== Page 54 (pypdf) ===
Page 47 of 73
used specifically by the community technical colleges. These
include, sewing machines, plumbing tools, welding machines and
accessories, and electrical installation tools. This measure will
strengthen skills development, enhance youth employability and
economic empowerment.
120. Mr. Speaker Sir , in a move to support persons with disabilities ,
Government will remove taxes on supportive devices and
equipment that covers all forms of disabilities. These include motor
vehicles specially adapted for persons with disabilities, prosthetic
limbs, hearing aids, and other specialised support equipment. This
measure promotes inclusivity and equal participation in economic
and social activities.
121. Mr. Speaker, Government had previously issued a moratorium
on motorcycle clearance, allowing Kabaza operato rs to pay
reduced import taxes to clear their motorcycles with t he Malawi
Revenue Authority, and register them with the Directorate of Road
Traffic and Safety Services. That moratorium has since expired.
However, Government has observed that numerous motorcycles
remain unregistered. Accordingly, Government is extending the
moratorium for an additional six months, effective 1 st April 2026.
Under this extension, motorcycles of engine size 100cc and below
will be required to pay MK56,000, whilst motorcycles of 101 to 250cc

=== Page 55 (pypdf) ===
Page 48 of 73
will be required to pay MK77,000 in lieu of import duties. I would like
therefore to take this opportunity to urge all Kabaza motorcycle
operators that have not yet cleared their motorcycles with MRA
and registered them with Road Traffic Directorate to mak e use of
this 6 months moratorium period noting that this is a second
extension of the moratorium period, and in this regards, the window
will close at the expiry of the moratorium.
122. Mr. Speaker Sir , to harmonise the tax treatment of religious
materials that are ordinarily duty -free, Government will remove
import taxes on Bibles, the Qur’an, and other religious audio
materials. These items will now be imported duty -free under
Customs Procedure Code 422.
123. Mr Speaker Sir, to reduce the influx of products that are readily
produced domestically and to protect emerging local industries,
Government is introducing import surcharges on selected imported
goods. These include, among others, dressed poultry, maize seed,
eggs, sweets , biscuits, crisps, matches, toothpicks, vegetables,
aluminium pots, diapers, mono cartons, treated electricity poles,

=== Page 56 (pypdf) ===
Page 49 of 73
plastic furniture, ballpoint pens, and other specified products. The
full list of these materials are attached to my statement.
124. Mr. Speaker Sir , Government has noted a growing inf lux of
powdered soft drink flavours, typically packaged in sachets .
People mix these powders with water to produce beverages such
as orange, lemon, or cola -flavoured drinks. To discourage their
consumption, particularly due to potential negative health effects
they bring on people , Government is introducing an excise tax of
20 percent on these powdered drink flavours.
125. Mr. Speaker Sir , in order to ensure that export proceeds are
repatriated back to Malawi, especially on the exports of sugar,
effective immediately, VAT will be applied on all sugar exports but
be refunded u pon proof of export supported by evidence of
repatriation of export proceeds to Malawi.
126. Mr. Speaker Sir, in order to discourage export of scrap metal,
Government is introducing export duty on scrap metal . This
measure addresses concerns related to vandalism of electricity
cables, telecommunications infrastructure, railways and bridges.

=== Page 57 (pypdf) ===
Page 50 of 73
127. Mr. Speaker Sir, in the quest to strengthen local manufacturing,
deepen value addition, and advance the “ Buy Malawi Strategy”,
all security agencies will henceforth be required either to
manufacture their uniforms themselves or procure their uniforms
from local manufacturers. To support this initiative and ensure
competitiveness and quality production, these institutions will be
permitted to import on duty free basis all raw materials used in the
manufacture of uniforms.
128. Mr. Speaker Sir , to support agricultural modernisation and
climate-resilient farming, Government is removing import duties on
greenhouses. This will enhance productivity and promote
sustainable agricultural practices.
129. Mr. Speaker Sir , in order to improve service delivery in the
education and health sectors, Government will remove import
duties on heavy-duty generators exceeding 75 KVA when imported
by registered and licensed educational institutions and hospitals.

=== Page 58 (pypdf) ===
Page 51 of 73
130. Mr. Speaker Sir , to enhance domestic revenue collection,
Government is introducing excise taxes on selected luxury goods.
These include wristwatches, perfumes, necklaces, earrings,
bangles, bracelets, cufflings, and video game consoles.
131. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government is also increasing the carbon tax
payable by foreign registered motor vehicles, noting that the rates
were last revised several years ago. This adjustment ensures
alignment with Government’s environmental objectives associated
with curbing carbon emissions into the atmosphere.
132. Mr. Speaker Sir , Government will introduce import duty on
artificial flowers , excluding wreaths, which will continue to be
imported duty-free.
133. Mr. Speaker Sir , this August House is aware that currently , fully
electric motor vehicles and hybrid motor vehicles are exempt from
import duty and excise tax. While this policy has supported the
transition toward cleaner transport, Government now seeks to
further promote the adoption of fully electric vehicles, which of fer

=== Page 59 (pypdf) ===
Page 52 of 73
greater environmental and fuel -efficiency benefits. In this regard,
Government will introduce an excise tax o f 10 percent on hybrid
motor vehicles with an engine capacity of 1501 to 2500cc, and 20
percent on hybrid motor vehicles with an engine capacity of
2501cc and above.
134. Mr. Speaker Sir, in line with COMESA Principles of international
trade, Government through the Malawi Revenue Authority
approved some cross -border operators confirmed as secure and
compliant tax payers, to enjoy the benefits of smooth and faster
clearance of their goods through a Scheme known as “Authorised
Economic Operators (AEO)”. In order to strengthen compliance
monitoring and enhance integrity of the Scheme, Government will
review the Authorised Economic Operators Regulations to also be
in line with regional practice.
135. Mr. Speaker Sir , finally, under the Customs and Excise Tax
measures, Government will revise various administrative fees
charged by the Malawi Revenue Authority, including processing
fees and escort fees, to ensure cost recovery and improved service
delivery.

=== Page 60 (pypdf) ===
Page 53 of 73
VALUE ADDED TAX MEASURES
136. Mr. Speaker Sir , after thorough consultations with various
stakeholders, Government is raising the mandatory registration
threshold for Value Added Tax (VAT) from the current annual
turnover of MK25 million to MK50 million. Further, businesses with an
annual turnover below the new MK50 million threshold will no longer
be registered for VAT and will not be required to operate under the
Electronic Invoicing System (EIS). This means that smaller and
medium enterprises as well as cross border traders will be excluded
from the EIS. However, companies with an annual turnover
exceeding MK50 million will be obliged to register for VAT and
comply with the EIS requirements. This decision has been taken
deliberately to ease the compliance burden on small and medium
enterprises and cross border traders, while ensuring that businesses
with sufficient capacity continue to operate within the VAT and EIS
framework.
137. Mr. Speaker Sir , some international companies are providing
services to Malawians over the internet and earning income from
users in Malawi without being physically located in our country.
Examples of these international companies include platforms such

=== Page 61 (pypdf) ===
Page 54 of 73
as Netflix, Facebook, and YouTube, among others. Malawians are
paying these service providers to watch movies, listen to music,
advertise products, download software or phone applications and
access many other digital services. However, these services
currently do not attract Value Added Tax (VAT), whereas if the
same services are provided by local companies, VAT is charged.
This creates an uneven playing field between foreign digital service
providers and local businesses. Thus, to capture locally generate d
value by foreign companies that is presently escaping taxation and
to promote fairness and equity between digital and traditional
businesses offering similar services, Government is introducing VAT
on digital services supplied by foreign companies . I will be
presenting a bill on this detailing how the tax will operate. Allow me
to point out, Mr. Speaker Sir, that this tax is already operational in
other countries within the region such as Zambia, Kenya, and
Uganda.
138. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government is undertaking a review of the VAT
Act with regards to the list of exempt goods or individuals and
institutions that import some goods duty free to ensure that there is
a proper balance between revenue needs and social
considerations. I will be presenting a detailed bill highlighting the
areas where we are making these adjustments.

=== Page 62 (pypdf) ===
Page 55 of 73
139. Mr. Speaker Sir, Government is harmonising and realigning the
period for claiming tax refunds under the VAT Act and the Tax
Administration Act to six (6) months, to ensure consistency in tax
administration and enhance clarity for taxpayers.
INCOME TAX MEASURES
140. Mr. Speaker Sir , irrigation farming represents the future of
agriculture if this country is to achieve food self -sufficiency and
significantly boost its agricultural sector. In recognition of this, the
Government will allow the construction of dams and other farm
water infrastructure to be treated as a deductible expense, similar
to the provisions currently applicable to rice and sugar farming. We
believe this initiative will promote irrigation based farming across a
variety of crops, including high value crops such as macadamia,
thereby enhancing productivity and sustainability in the sector.
141. Mr. Speaker Sir, following constructive engagements with various
stakeholders in the gaming industry, stock market traders, and the
banking and telecommunications sectors, I am pleased to provide
the following clarifications and make targeted adjustments to

=== Page 63 (pypdf) ===
Page 56 of 73
certain taxes and levies to ensure fairness, efficiency, and
alignment with economic growth objectives.
a. With regard to the Motor Vehicle Insurance Accident Levy
which I announce d in my 2025 -26 Mid -Year Budget
Statement, Government is taking further steps to strengthen its
administration. To that end, the responsibility for its collection
will be assigned to the Malawi Revenue Authority. The
necessary amendments will be made to the Taxation Act to
give effect to the operationalisation of this measure.
b. With regard to Capital Gains Tax on the sale of listed shares,
Government has, following thorough consultations with key
players in the financial and capital markets industry, resolved
to simplify the current regime. In this regard, the existing
Capital Gains Tax on the disposal of listed shares will be
replaced with a final withholding tax of two percent (2%) on
the gross proceeds from the sale of such shares. This
withholding tax will be deducted at source by the broker, the
Malawi Stock Exchange, or any other person designated
under the law.

=== Page 64 (pypdf) ===
Page 57 of 73
c. In addition, Mr. Speaker, Sir, following extensive consultations
with stakeholders in the gaming and lotteries sector, including
the regulator, the Malawi Gaming and Lotteries Authority
(MAGLA), Government has resolved to reform the taxation of
winnings in this sector. In order to simplify administration and
enhance compliance, Government will move away from
taxing winnings and instead introduce a final withholding tax
of 10 percent on the wagered amount for cas inos; and 15
percent final withholding tax on withdrawals for lotteries and
sports betting.
d. On Bank Levy, the levy will not apply on transfer of
Government funds to or from the Reserve Bank of Malawi and
commercial banks
e. Government is further simplifying the administration of
residential rental income tax by introducing a final
withholding tax of 15 percent. However, rental income
derived from commercial property will continue to be subject
to withholding tax under the existing framework. No changes
are being made in that regard.

=== Page 65 (pypdf) ===
Page 58 of 73
142. Mr. Speaker Sir , Government is also introducing several
administrative amendments to the Taxation Act to strengthen tax
administration and compliance. These include:
i. Providing for electronic service of documents under
Section 37 of the Tax Administration Act, thereby
modernising communication between taxpayers and the
tax authority;
ii. Defining the mineral royalty period as one month under the
17th Schedule to the Taxation Act, thereby ensuring clarity
and consistency in administration;
iii. Clarifying that the Bank or Money Transfer Levy is not an
allowable deduction for income tax purposes;
iv. Introducing a provision under Section 39 sub -section 3 of
the Tax Administration Act allowing transfer pricing audits
to go back up to 9 years; and

=== Page 66 (pypdf) ===
Page 59 of 73
v. Re-writing the taxation of supernormal profit tax to improve
clarity.
NON-TAX REVENUE MEASURES
143. Mr. Speaker Sir , Government is undertaking a comprehensive
review of all user fees, fines, and charges collected by various
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). This exercise is
aimed at improving service delivery in the public sector by ensuring
that fees and charges are cost reflective.
144. Further, Mr. Speaker Sir, in line with the directive by His Excellency
the State President , Prof Arthur Peter Munthalika, we are
automating most Government functions, especially the collection
of non-tax revenues. Our objective is to eliminate cash transactions
across all MDAs to enhance transparency, reduce leakages, and
improve accountability. Under this reform, payments for public
services such as police fees and fines , will only be made through
mobile money, bank transfers, Visa payments via point -of-sale
machines, or direct bank deposits. This reform will be rolled out on
1st April 2026 , starting with the Malawi Police Service, and
subsequently extended to all other Ministries, Departments, and
Agencies.

=== Page 67 (pypdf) ===
Page 60 of 73
145. Finally, on the non-tax measures, Mr Speaker Sir, Government will
be undertaking a reviewing of all Concessions and Treasury Funds
with a view to assess their effectiveness and value addition to the
budget. Consequently, Concessions and Fund Orders for all non
performing Treasury Funds will be revoked.

=== Page 68 (pypdf) ===
Page 61 of 73
Conclusion
146. In conclusion Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to express my sincere
appreciation to all Malawians for their constructive contributions
throughout the budget formulation process.
147. Mr. Speaker Sir, I would also like to extend our sincere
appreciation to the following Cooperating Partners: the World
Bank, the African Development Bank, the Flanders, International
Fund For Agricultural Development (IFAD), the Republic of
Zimbabwe, India, the Kingdom of Morocco , Norway, F oreign
Commonwealth and Development Office (F CDO) of the United
Kingdom ( UK), Japan, Ireland, Iceland, Switzerland, Korea, our
Private Sector especially the Financial institutions and corporate
organizations: First Capita l Bank, First Discount House, Standard
Bank, Press Corporation, National Bank, Eco Bank, Airtel Malawi,
Nyasa Tobacco Company and Petroleum Importers Limited, NICO
Group in partnership with NBS Bank for their unwavering support.
148. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to recognize and
commend support by the private sector particularly Pacific Limited
in rehabilitating boreholes covering every constituency in the
country, which has improved access to safe and portable water.

=== Page 69 (pypdf) ===
Page 62 of 73
149. In addition, Mr. Speaker Sir, I also thank the International
Monetary Fund for the continued support being provided to the
country and it is Government’s expectation that in the short to
medium term we will negotiate for a new programme.
150. Mr Speaker Sir, Let me also appreciate the United Nations,
European Union; United States of America for the support to the
Health Sector; Global Fund for the support in the Health Sector; the
Federal Republic of Germany for the pledges under new bilateral
Government to Government compact. Saudi Fund and Kuwait
Fund for the commitment to finance the Blantyre District Hospital;
Abhu Dhabi for the commitment to support the rehabilitation of the
Bakili Muluzi International Airport . Furthermore, Mr. Speaker Sir , I
would like to express our profound appreciation to the People’s
Republic of China for the grant financing in support of the Extension
of the Lilongwe Dual Carriage Way from Kanengo to Kamuzu
International Airport and Digitalization of Government service.
151. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to Move.

=== Page 70 (pypdf) ===
Page 63 of 73
ANNEX 1: LIST OF FOREIGN IMPORTED PRODUCTS WHERE SURCHARGE
WILL APPLY IN ORDER TO ENCOURAGE LOCAL PRODUCTION
HS Code Description Rate
02.07 Dressed
Poultry
30%
03.02,
03.03,
03.04,
03.05
Fish 10%
04.01 Milk 15%
0403.20.00 Yoghurt 15%
04.07 Eggs 30%
0409.00.00 Natural
Honey
20%
07 Vegetable 40%
08 Fruits 15%
0904 Pepper of the
genus Piper
15%
1005.10.00 Maize seed 25%
1101.00.10 Wheat flour 5%
1507.90.00,
1508.90.10,
1508.90.90,
1511.90.11,
1511.90.19,
1511.90.21,
1511.90.29,
Refined Oils 10%

=== Page 71 (pypdf) ===
Page 64 of 73
HS Code Description Rate
1511.90.90,
1512.19.00,
1512.29.00,
1701.13.10,
1701.13.20,
1701.13.90,
1701.14.10,
1701.14.20,
1701.14.90
Cane sugar 15%
1702.90.90 Artificial
Honey
20%
1704.90.00 Sweets 20%
1905.31.00 Biscuits 20%
2005.20.00 Crisps 20%
20.01-
20.08
Vegetables 40%
2103.90.00 Chilli Sauce 15%
22
excluding
2202.99.10,
22.09.00.00
i. Alcoholic
beverages
ii. Non- alcohol
beverages
15%
2402.20.00 Cigarettes
containing
tobacco
US$4/1,000
sticks
2523.29.00
excluding
2523.10.00
Portland
Cement
30%
3605.00.00 Matches 25%

=== Page 72 (pypdf) ===
Page 65 of 73
HS Code Description Rate
3924 Tableware,
kitchenware,
other
household
articles and
hygienic or
toilet articles,
of plastics
20%
44.03 Treated poles 25%
44.19 Toothpicks 40%
4819.20.30 Monolayer
cartons
15%
4819.40.10 Bags for
packing
cement
20%
4820.20.10 Exercise
books with
soft cover
10%
4901.99.10 Textbooks 10%
63.01 Blankets 25%
6305.33.10 Polypropylene
woven bags
for the
packing of
cement
20%
6305.33.90 Polypropylene
woven bags
20%

=== Page 73 (pymupdf) ===
Page 66 of 73
HS Code
Description
Rate
for the
packing of
grain, flour
and other
cereals
7615.10.30
Aluminum
pots
15%
9403.70.90
Plastic
Furniture
20%
9608.10.00
Ball point
pens
15%
9619.00.90
Diapers
25%